---
layout: post
title: Why a certain stem cell produces only the same cell types and not any other cell types?
---

DNA is the same in each and every cell of the body. If we have the same DNA blueprint in each and every cell of the body, then why do they perform different functions. The protein coded by the liver cell is different from that coded by the kidney cell. The simple answer is that cells must switch on or off certain sets of genes according to their functions. The system that sets certain sets of genes on or off must pass on from the parent cell to the daughter cell every time there is a cell division.

This creates a paradox as only DNA is material that carries genetic information and DNA stays the same in different cell types in one individual. So, it means that some modifications responsible for gene expression must pass on from the parent cell to the daughter cell and these modifications must not change the original nature of the DNA code. This thing comes under another branch of genetics which is known as epigenetics.

Many types of epigenetic modification have been discovered and the research is still in progress. The first epigenetic modification identified was DNA methylation. In DNA methylation, a methyl group gets attached to the fifth carbon of the base-pair C. The C is followed by G. This is called CpG motifs. This methyl group doesn't alter the genetic sequence. It has an effect only on gene expression. The CpG motifs are majorly present in the promoter region of the gene. The region is called CpG island. The level of DNA methylation in the CpG island is low when that gene is inactive. Suppose a cell type doesn't require a certain protein for its functioning, then in the promoter region of the gene which codes for that protein, the level of DNA methylation will be increased. There are many other ways of controlling gene expression also.

{% include image.html url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iamspriyadarshi/iamspriyadarshi.github.io/master/images/adrian.jpg" description="Adrian Bird" %}

Adrian Bird is widely known as the godfather of DNA methylation. Now, the question to wonder here is how DNA methylation controls gene expression. Adrian Bird discovered how DNA methylation switches genes off. He showed that when DNA is methylated, it binds a protein MECP2 (Methyl CpG binding protein) to CpG island. Once it binds, it stops DNA transcription machinery from binding to the promoter region, and thus mRNA can't be produced.

Another question that arises here is how does the pattern of DNA ethylation pass from the mother cell to the daughter cell? This is done by using DNA methyltransferase (DNMT). When replication occurs in the DNA methylated region, DNMT recognizes if CpG motifs are only methylated on one strand and replace the missing methylation on the newly copied strand. Therefore, the daughter cell has the same DNA methylation pattern as that of the parent cell. As a result, a certain cell produces cells of only certain types in spite of being the same genetic material in all cell types.
